# Telemetry - Fake Data Generation

# Instructions of Use

To begin the data simulation program, navigate to the `../server/fake/` directory. Run the command `> node main.js`.
Optional flags:

<ul>
    <li><code>--runtime [number]</code>: specifies the simulation time (in seconds) with the following number argument. If left undefined, the default runtime is 30s, with the option to exit the process by running <code>^C</code> anytime.</li>
    <li><code>--random</code>: sets random flag to true, invoking the randomising data generation logic for the full simulation. Primarily for debugging and front-end testing purposes.</li>
    <li><code>--specific</code>: Allows the choice to only simulate specific sensors. The permissible sensor types currently include:
    <ul>
        <li>motion</li>
        <li>pressure</li>
        <li>temperature</li>
        <li>keyence</li>
        <li>resistance</li>
        <li>magnetism</li>
        <li>levitation</li>
    </ul>
    Ensure that they are spelt correctly, as any typos will be rejected by the program and won't be simulated.</li>
<ul>

<hr>

### Purpose

To iteratively generate transient and physically reasonable series of data points for the readings generated by all numerical-based sensors on the pod. Currently this does not cover the enumerated measurements, i.e. on/off status readings. This is effectively a
simulation of the expected sensor readings during a live run. Data will be uploaded live to the GUI through the mqtt server, and assessed
for error handling and other metrics.

I.e. all of the thermnistors have the exact same proerty values. In actuality, their readings will differ as they placed in different locations across the pod. However, the data structure does not hold this information and therefore they are equivalent, so only one generic 'thermistor' object will be studied.

In contrast, the pressure gauges have descriptive names which allow one to infer their likely behaviour during operation (front/back-push refers to gauging pressure upon acceleration, which would see an absolute increase in gauge pressure on both ends of the pod due to the greater stagnation pressure and the nose of the pod and pressure wake field behind). Similarly, the pressure gauges of the reservoirs can be reasonably assumed to not vary significantly, but as temperature rises the pressure will increase slightly due to Amonton's Law.

<hr>

### Methodology

The program will record and store all values calculated by each sensor's methods defined in `sensors.ts` over a user-specified timeframe, with each sensor set to a specific sampling time interval. `main.ts` filters and constructs an array of relevant and unique sensors from the Pod Ness sensor object structure. A new interface is created called `Sensor Data`. It extends `RangeMeasurement` - adding the properties of `currentValue` and `movingAvg`, and encapsulates the measurement object with the sensor's name as a `Record`, reflecting the object shape of the pod's sensor objects.

A Singleton class was created in its dedicated file, `data-manager.ts`. When the program is run, a single instance of this class is created. The instance holds the current set of data, and at each iteration is updated before the current data is pushed into data storage arrays for all sensors. Once created, this instance and its data property is accessible from both the main file, and the pod behavious class file, which holds all the methods written to generate each sensor's next value.

In the main file, the program's main function, `generateDataSeries`, runs a loop iterating through the time period defined. For each sensor type, it calls the relevant static method in the `Behaviour` class. Some sensors can be categorised, e.g. the navigation sensors. The values for displacement, velocity and acceleration are interdependet. As the pod's velocity is increased, its displacement and acceleration can be calculated, given the acceleration constraints provided by its critical limits nested object.

A logistic function was chosen as the appropriate function for pod velocity to follow. This allows us to minimse the time to reach maximum speed by adjusting the peak acceleration (dv/dt) to reach but not exceed 5m/s^2 at the velocity-time inflection point.

Similar functions have been or are in the process of being created for the rest of the sensors. Complexity varies, and some require a lot more guesswork.

`generateDataSeries` takes in a boolean parameter `random`, set to false by default. If the user sets this to true, iteration will be completely random, selecting sensors' new values as a random number between their critical limits.

<pre class ="color: white">
<h3><strong>Project Structure</strong></h3>
<strong>data-gen</strong>/
| - <a href="#main">main.ts</a> // <em>runs the program</em>
| - <a href="#index">index.ts</a> // <em>handles imports and exports</em>
| - src/
|   | - sensors.ts // <em>self-contained file with classes describing sensor functionality</em>
|   | - sensorData.csv // <em>setup file defining sensor input params with read/write permissions</em>
| - utils/
|   | - data-manager.ts // <em>Singleton class structure used to track, update, upload and store data in real-time</em>
|   | - config.ts // <em>sets up the program and all objects & variables used within</em>
|   | - helpers.ts // <em>contains generic functions used throughout the project</em>
| - tests/ // <em>yet to be implemented</em>
| - tsconfig.json // <em>generic settings for ../server/ directory</em>
| - README.md
</pre>
<!-- package.JSON (add if needed) -->

### Types

New types are defined for this program:

<ul>
    <li><code>LiveMeasurement</code>: extends <code>RangeMeasurement</code>, adding the properties of <code>currentValue</code> and <code>timestep</code>, allowing the adapted use of prewritten data structures.</li>
    <li><code>SensorData</code>: <code>{ [x: string]: LiveMeasurement }</code>. This takes the sensor data and puts them back in the standard <code>Record< string, Measurement></code> format.</li>
    <li><code>StoredData</code>: <code>{ [key: string]: [(number | string)][] }</code>. This object has the sensors/measurements as keys, and at each sensors' timestep an array containing the time stamp and current value are pushed into the sensor's array. While data points will be uploaded in real-time, they are stored for recording and analysis purposes.</li>
    <li><code>InitialState</code>: <code>[key: string]: { dt: number; initialVal: number; }</code>. This interface defines the object which holds the user-specified properties. Again, the key is the sensor name. The user can read and write to a CSV file to specify any or all of the sensors' initial values and the time interval between their generated readings.</li>
</ul>

<span class ="display: block; height: 2px; background-color: #bbb;"></span>

### Config

This setup stage imports nested `measurements` object from <code>pods.ts</code> data. The `rangeFilter` function filters this data into an array of only the measurement/sensor objects of type `RangeMeasurement`, and removes duplicate redundancy, then converts it back into an object of similar format to `measurements`. This makes the code readable and familiar. This new object is exported by default.

The array manipulation removes those without a `limits` property (i.e. of type `EnumMeasurement`), and converts all duplicates into equivalent strings to facilitate filtering e.g. 'thermistor_1', 'thermistor_2' -> both become 'thermistor'. Upon the ultimate conversion back into an object (the code uses `Object.fromEntries( Object.entries(measurements) )`), only one 'thermistor' entry is retained due to the JS Object prototype's inherent unique key characteristics.

Then the `readData` helper function is called. This function reads the CSV data, which consists of `[sensor/quantity, time interval, initial value]`. It returns a Promise, which resolves if the resulting object (of type `InitialState`) is not empty. The result is chained to a `then` block, which requires that `unqSensorObj[sensor].currentValue=response[sensor].initialVal`, ensuring the CSV data has the correct sensor names and number of rows.

<!-- <em>For more assurance, this can be changed to reject the Promise if the object doesn't have the expected number of sensors.</em> -->

<span class ="display: block; height: 1px; background-color: #bbb;"></span>

### Index

Gathers and exports all exports from relevant project files for ease of access

<span class ="display: block; height: 1px; background-color: #bbb;"></span>

### Sensors

Self-contained module containing classes for the different sensor/measurement categories (Navigation, Pressure etc.). Each subclass inherits from the parent Sensor class, reducing repetitive code. The amount of different classes is as small as possible, each combined into groups of similar functionality.

Classes are instantiated once each in `main.ts`. The Sensor class is constructed with a single `LiveMeasurement` sensor object, and its properties are set as `protected readonly`, allowing sub-classes to access them but placing a data barrier from external functions to access or modify these values.

The `_currentValue` variable is mutable, so that only a single instance per class is needed, updating its current value.

Not all sensors/measurements require their own class instance. For instance, in the navigation category only velocity (or the accelerometer reading) needs to be recorded in the class instance. From this value and given a reasonable function of time, the other navigation variables can be calculated accordingly at each time step using basic kinematics and calculus of limts. Additionally, many other measurements have a dependency on pod velocity, generally increasing in proportion to the speed. Temperature is another measurement which dictates certain others, like reservoir pressure for example.

Read more about sensors <a href="#sensorsStructure">here</a>.

<span class ="display: block; height: 1px; background-color: #bbb;"></span>

### Data Manager

<span class ="display: block; height: 1px; background-color: #bbb;"></span>

## Main

Main functional file. After importing all necessary objects, classes and functions, it runs the `GenerateDataSeries` iterative function, updating the `dataControl` instance at each iteration.

Imports the adapted `rangeSensors` object from `config.ts` as well as the Sensor class and its sub-classes from `sensors.ts`, which each consist of similar functionality shared by a category of sensors such as Navigation, Pressure etc.

Runs the main loop with user-defined parameters, with the actual functionality and data management in the other files.

<span class ="display: block; height: 2px; background-color: #bbb;"></span>

## To-do list

<ol id="list">
    <li class="done">Complete <code>config.ts</code></li>
    <li class="done">Read the sensor specs for more info to use to estimate functionality specifics, estimated noise reduction quality, etc. to make the data generation more reflective of reality. Add more sensor properties if appropriate.</li>
    <li class="done">Add noise and sensor type properties existing pod data with any new changes from the sensor spec sheet</li>
    <li class="doing">Add general functionality in Utilities</li>
    <ul>
        <li class="na">Write an async function for user to read sensor parameters CSV</li>
        <li class="na">Write an async function for user to modify CSV sensor parameters</li>
        <li class="doing">Write function to optimise data generation complexity for any given set of user-defined sensor reading time steps</li>
        <li class="done">Broadcast data live to an animated GUI graph</li>
        <li class="done">Write a function to generate noise</li>
        <li class="done">Write an exponential moving average method with parameters <em>alpha</em> and <em>window (amount of recent data points to average)</em></li>
    </ul>
    </li>
    <li class="doing">sensors.ts</code>
    <ul>
        <li class="doing">Create logical functions for next data points for all sensor groups</li>
        <li class="done">Define sensor reading hierarchy</li>
    </ul>
    </li>
    <li class="doing">dataControl.ts</code>
    <ul>
        <li class="na">Create data storage functionality and object interface</li>
        <li class="na">Change data access methods to <code>get</code> and <code>set</code></li>
        <li class="doing">Upload data values to server within the <code>updateData</code> method</li>
        <li class="doing">Combine randomise and default generateData methods into one with conditional logic</li>
        <li class="done">Add functionality for cases of different timesteps for different sensors which may depend on each other</li>
    </ul>
    </li>
    <li class="done">main.ts</code>
    <ul>
        <li class="done">Provide user freedom to modify parameters with CLI input:</li>
        <ul>
            <li class="done">Data generation type: random/logical</li>
            <li class="done">Sensor-specific time intervals at which readings are generated</li>
            <li class="done">Total runtime for the data generation loop</li>
        </ul>
        </li>
        <li class="done">Instantiate sensor classses and finish loop functionality</li>
        <ul>
            <li class="done">Plan the logic conceptually</li>
            <li class="done">Program it into the loop</li>
        </ul>
        </li>
    </ul>
    <li class="done">Create logical and modular file structure <em>(separation of concerns)</em></li>
    <li class="done">Refactor:
    <ul>
        <li class="done">Minimise code and amount of classes as much as possible</li>
        <li class="done">Review file structure and ensure it is logical, readable and non-repetitive</li>
    </ul>
    <li class="done">Remove comments</li>
    </ul></em></li>
</ol>

<style>
    :root {
        --green: #61E786;
        --orange: #D46B0F;
        --red: #DB5461;
        --grey: #8888;
    }

    .done {
        color: var(--green);
    }
    .doing {
        color: var(--orange);
    }
    .to_do {
        color: var(--red);
    }
    .na {
        color: var(--grey);
    }

    ol#list {
        list-style-type: none;
        counter-reset: my-counter;
    }

    ol#list > li {
        counter-increment: my-counter;
    }

    ol#list > li::before {
        content: counter(my-counter);
        color: white;
        margin-right: 0.5em;
    }
</style>

<hr>

## Sensors Structure

Every single sensor is "reliant" upon velocity or temperature readings for fake data generation
Temperature is a function of velocity. Thus every single sensor needs velocity's currentValue to update.

Some have dependencies on both such as pressure, but as vel and temp. are interdependent it is akin to just
being dependent on velocity. I.e. if, say, brakes pressure reservoir=K _ temp, and temp=M _ velocity,
then pressure=K _ M _ velocity

Therefore every sensor needs velocity at that instant. So velocity must be calculated at the lowest timestep of
any sensor, even if the accelerometer does not update as frequently. Otherwise, we could estimate the velocity
value through linear interpolation.

In terms of classes: Sensor parents all. Navigation returns the values of displacement, velocity and acceleration from the accelerometer sensor. This fake data needs some reasonable function to follow, so a logistic curve for velocity was chosen. The derivative of this function is the acceleration. We can ensure it peaks at just below maxAcceleration. But even though the accelerometer is the sensor, if we have a related function for velocity then it's equivalent to having a velocity sensor instead. So it makes sense to use the velocity logistic curve as the governing variable. Acceleration will be its discrete derivative (vel - prevVel) / dt. Displacement is simply disp=prevVel _ currentTime + 1/2 a _ currentTime\*\*2.

Some sensors like Hall Effect don't even care about temperature. They are solely simple functions of velocity.

So we calculate velocity at every timestep.

<strong>Classes & Subclasses</strong>

<ul>
  <li>Sensor</li>
  <ul>
    <li>Navigation</li>
  </ul>

So let's say the user wants to get all variables. He sets the same timestep of 500ms for all of them.\

<hr>

#### Features to be added

<ul>
    <li>Prompt user to edit time steps for each sensors' readings as desired:</li>
    <ol>
        <li>Print all sensors along with their default time step</li>
        <li><code>> Edit timesteps? [y/n]</code></li>
        <li>If 'y', cycle through each sensor and ask: <code>>[<em>sensor name</em>]: enter preferred timestep in ms (e.g. 500) or press Enter to move to next sensor</code></li>
        <li>Update initial conditions object with any altered timesteps</li>
    </ol>
    <li>Prompt user to edit initial conditions by uploading a csv file or changing specific values through command prompt</li>
<ul>

<!-- First prompt user if they want to set ICs or keep as is
If they want to keep as is, use the object below
Otherwise, print the file
Ask user which to edit
Write to file with changes
Read from file and set new ones as ICs in object below -->

<span class ="display: block; height: 1px; background-color: #bbb;"></span>

## Next Steps

<ol>
    <li>Code in the noise. Shouldn't be difficult, just use a function based on Math.random and weight the amplitude of the noise to some extent. Decide whether how 'noisy' data is might be dependent upon certain vasriables such as speed. I'm not sure so ask GPT or research this.</li>
    <li>Create moving average function with ```window``` parameter set to 5 as default. Look into exponential moving average too. The average value will be used to determine whether a reading is out of bounds or it's just the noise.</li>
    <li>Find out how the noise levels compare from different sensors e.g. thermistors, pressure gauges, digital sensors, navigation etc.</li>
    <li>Create a simple function for <strong>reservoir pressure</strong>, it will not vary by much, but increase with temperature slightly. Reading will have some noise.</li>
    <li>Write functions for the other pressures. Push=acceleration, so front pressure goes up and back goes down (both go further away from atmospheric, their absolute gauge pressure increases). And pull=decelleration, so the opposite. Also double check with David that you're interpreting the pressure variable terms correctly.</li>
    <li>I am assuming that the accelerometer(s) are all supposed to measure the absolute pod acceleration with respect to a stationay observer, and that's how the navigation parameters are found. Except this assumption seems wrong, as the accelerometer has a range of -150 to 150 m/s^2 while acceleration can only go up to 5 m/s^2. Is this perhaps referring to the sensors' physical limits of its capability to read acceleration, while the pod itself is not built to exceed 5m/s^2? In other words, the accelerometer will be limited to the 0-5 range, it's just not "critical" for the sensor in terms of safety, it's critical for the pod's safety. Perhaps. But another uncertainty is that the pod's acceleration can be easily determined by it's speed, which - <em>I assume</em> - we are controlling. <strong><em>Update: wrong, we are not controlling speed. We just switch on the power and track it using the accelerometer. The sensor's operational range is +-150. Above 150 it won't read the acceleration accurately. The pod cannot exceed 5.</em></strong> We have one sensor to measure navigation quantities, and that's the accelerometer. It has an operating range of -150 to 150. This specific pod prototype, Pod Ness, has an operating acceleration range of 0 to 5 (presumably this means -5 to 5). We generate fake data for the accelerometer sensor, and analyse it with the view of keeping pod acceleration below 5, and we also calculate other navigation quantities starting from acceleration.</li>
</ol>
<hr>

<ol>
    <strong>Thursday notes from discussion with David + discussion with Damen about the public app, React and Three.js</strong><hr>
    <li><strong>Seperate all sensor data into its own file. This sensor data structure will be like the one in pods, but reduced to the data-gen relevant sensors, and with added/removed properties. Outside of this file, no other functional part of the program will be able to modify or access the file. The data file will be imported. Its properties are constant (so no 'currentVal' or 'movingAvg'). They are properties inherent to the sensor, like with the pod object. A new property David would like is a sampling rate property. This will define the delta T for that sensor's data generation, giving us a lot more freedom and making the code run a lot quicker as right now, there's only one global delta T variable so if we needed say 0.05s, all variables would be measured twenty times per second which would be unnecessary and slow. Of course, the value of this property will be changed and modified by our team, but not during runtime. This is a fixed object which is exporting its data for the data generation function to run. Another object or array will store the transient values, which we will also send live to the server as they are calculated and a graph can be animated in real time.</strong></li>
    <li>One issue I foresee is that if different sensors have different delta Ts, it will make the main loop more complicated. Say the thermistor takes a reading every 0.2s. The accelerometer every 0.5s. So we'd run the loop ever 0.2, while checking if the time is also a multiple of 0.5 (and all the other sensors' times). To mitigate this slightly, I will add functionality to the ```specific``` parameter, so we can view a select few variables in one run, or all of them if we want to.</li>
    <li>Different sensors will have a new property which defines its time interval (dt) and perhaps its degree of noise (as higher quality sensors would have less noise due to better electronic circuits)</li>
    Separate the sensor file into a new file with the sensor object and its properties relevant to the data generation
    <li>The fake data generation program will be placed into its own directory</li>
    <li>It's only for internal use, but there are restrictions/rules we need to follow from EHW committee</li>
    <li>Add a method to the data manager class to upload the data at each step of the iteration to the server/mqtt so we can view it live (graph animation)</li>
    <li>We don't have complete or current data on all the sensors we're using   and we'll need to ask electronics team to fill in a spreadsheet with the data for range limits, (critical and warning and expected/nominal levels)</li>
    <li>Run the logical data gen methods past the electronics/other team to see if they agree it makes sense</li>
</ol>

<!-- - [ ] <code class="done">**config.ts**</code>
    - [ ] Write an async method for user to read sensor parameters CSV
    - [ ] Write an async method for user to modify CSV sensor parameters
    - [ ] Create logical and modular file structure <em>(separation of concerns)</em>
<hr>

- [ ] <code class="done">**sensors.ts**</code>
    - [ ] Create logical functions for next data points for all sensor groups
    - [ ] Categorise sensors with similar data functionality into the same class, e.g. class TempDependent, VelocityDependent, Pressure etc.

<hr>

- [ ] <code>**data-manager.ts**</code>

<hr>

- [ ] <code>**main.ts**</code><br>
    - [ ] Change main function to interact with Sensor classes, not Behaviour (old version's file)
    - [ ] Provide user freedom to modify parameters:
        - [ ] Data generation type: random/logical
        - [ ] Sensor-specific time intervals at which readings are generated
        - [ ] Total runtime for the data generation loop
    - [ ] Instantiate sensor classes and finish loop functionality
    - [ ] Add functionality for cases of different time steps for different sensors which may depend on each other
    - [ ] Plan the logic conceptually
    - [ ] Program it into the loop

<hr>



- [ ] **Refactor**:
    - [ ] Minimise code and amount of classes as much as possible
    - [ ] Review file structure and ensure it is logical, readable and non-repetitive
    - [ ] Remove comments -->
